# BeeViruses
PNW honey bee and bumble bee virus study

This study has thus far resulted in two papers, one published in Journal of Invertebrate Pathology:


Factors affecting virus prevalence in honeybees in the Pacific-Northwest, USA 

Abstract
Global efforts to assess honey bee health show viruses are major stressors that undermine colony performance. Identifying factors that affect virus incidence, such as management practices and landscape context, could aid in slowing virus transmission. Here we surveyed viruses in honey bees from 86 sites in the Pacific Northwest, USA, and tested effects of regional bee density, movement associated with commercial pollination, julian date, and hive management on virus prevalence. We also explored patterns of virus co-occurrence and spatial autocorrelation to identify whether local transmission was a primary driver of pathogen distribution. Our surveys found widespread prevalence of Deformed wing virus (DWV), Sacbrood virus (SBV), and Black queen cell virus (BQCV). BQCV and SBV were most prolific in commercial apiaries, while Chronic bee paralysis virus (CPBV) was more common in hobbyist apiaries than commercial apiaries. DWV was most common in urban landscapes and was best predicted by mite prevalence and julian date, while the incidence of both SBV and BQCV were best predicted by regional apiary density. We did not find evidence of additional spatial autocorrelation for any viruses, although high co-occurrence suggests parallel transmission patterns. Our results support the importance of mite management in slowing virus spread and suggest that greater bee density increases transmission. Our study provides support that viruses are widespread in honey bees and connects known mechanisms of virus transmission to the distribution of pathogens observed across the Pacific Northwest.


Bumble bee health and apiary density in the Pacific Northwest

Abstract
Common bee viruses first isolated in honey bees are known to infect and circulate in wild bee species, suggesting a need for community level assessments of bee virus prevalence. While the most common bee viruses are less prevalent in wild bee populations than honey bees, they are occasionally locally common, and several are observed in both managed and wild bees. However, most studies of bee viruses do not assess prevalence across both honey bees and wild bees at the same sites. We addressed this by surveying the prevalence of six viruses in honey bees and wild bumble bees at 71 sites across urban and agricultural sites in the Pacific Northwest, USA. These data were used to assess covariance in virus prevalence between bee groups across multiple ecotypes. We also assessed how virus prevalence in wild bees was affected by apiary virus prevalence and landscape context by surveying six different honeybee viruses. We show that Deformed wing virus (DWV) and Black queen cell virus (BQCV) were more common in honey bees than in bumblebees, while Israeli acute paralysis virus (IAPV) was observed at similar levels in wild bumble bees and honey bees. While IAPV and DWV were more common in urban than in agricultural areas, especially in the western cities, prevalence of BQCV in bumble bees was best predicted by BQCV prevalence in honey bees. Of the six viruses surveyed, only BQCV was significantly correlated between honey bee and bumble bee populations across the region, and BQCV cooccurrence was best predicted by regional honey bee apiary density. Our study provides evidence that common bee viruses are found in both honey bees and wild bumblebees at the same sites, although prevalence was not necessarily correlated among the two bee genera. Understanding the prevalence and impacts of bee viruses on both managed and wild bees is key for pollinator conservation across landscapes that depend on pollinators.
